



Network Working Group                                        C. de Kater
Internet-Draft                                             N. Rustignoli
Intended status: Informational                               ETH Zuerich
Expires: 25 February 2023                                 24 August 2022


                        SCION Control-Plane PKI
                     draft-dekater-scion-pki-latest

Abstract

   This document presents the trust concept and design of the SCION
   _control-plane PKI_, SCION's public key infrastructure model.  SCION
   (Scalability, Control, and Isolation On Next-generation networks) is
   a path-aware, inter-domain network architecture.  The control-plane
   PKI, or short CP-PKI, handles cryptographic material and lays the
   foundation for the authentication procedures in SCION.  It is used by
   SCION's control plane to authenticate and verify path information,
   and builds the basis for SCION's special trust model based on so-
   called Isolation Domains.

   The document first describes the trust model behind SCION's control-
   plane PKI, and provides a short overview of the certificates, keys,
   and roles involved.  It then continues with detailed specifications
   of the building blocks of SCION's control-plane PKI.  The document
   concludes with several considerations in regard to deploying the
   control-plane PKI.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://scionassociation.github.io/scion-cppki_I-D/draft-dekater-
   scion-pki.html.  Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-dekater-scion-pki/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/scionassociation/scion-cppki_I-D.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 25 February 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Trust Model
     1.2.  Trust Relations within an Isolation Domain
       1.2.1.  Updates and Trust Resets
     1.3.  Overview of Certificates, Keys, and Roles
     1.4.  Trust Concept as a Function
       1.4.1.  Input
       1.4.2.  Output
     1.5.  Conventions and Definitions
   2.  Security Considerations
   3.  IANA Considerations
   4.  References
     4.1.  Normative References
     4.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The control-plane PKI (CP-PKI) lays the foundation for the
   authentication procedures in SCION.  It handles all cryptographic
   material used in the public key infrastructure of SCION's control
   plane.  This section first introduces the key concepts of the SCION
   CP-PKI, including the trust model, its core elements (certificates,
   keys, and roles), and their relationships.  The sections after the
   Introduction provide detailed specifications of the building blocks
   of the CP-PKI.

   *Note*: For more detailed information on the SCION next-generation
   inter-domain architecture, see [CHUAT22], especially Chapter 2, as
   well as the IETF Internet Drafts [I-D.scion-overview] and
   [I-D.scion-components].

1.1.  Trust Model

   Given the diverse nature of the constituents in the current Internet,
   an important challenge is how to scale authentication of network
   elements (such as AS ownership, hop-by-hop routing information, name
   servers for DNS, and domains for TLS) to the global environment.  The
   roots of trust of currently prevalent public key infrastructure (PKI)
   models do not scale well to a global environment, because (1)
   mutually distrustful parties cannot agree on a single trust root
   (monopoly model), and because (2) the security of a plethora of roots
   of trust is only as strong as its weakest link (oligopoly model) -
   see also [BARRERA17].

   The monopoly model suffers from two main drawbacks: First, all
   parties must agree on a single root of trust.  Secondly, the single
   root of trust represents a single point of failure, the misuse of
   which enables the forging of certificates.  Also, its revocation can
   result in a kill-switch for all the entities it certifies.  The
   oligopoly model relies on several roots of trust, all equally and
   completely trusted.  However, this is not automatically better:
   Whereas the monopoly model has a single point of failure, the
   oligopoly model has the drawback of exposing more than one point of
   failure.

   Thus, there is a need for a trust architecture that supports
   meaningful trust roots in a global environment with inherently
   distrustful parties.  This new trust architecture should provide the
   following properties:

   *  Trust agility (see further below);

   *  Resilience to single root of trust compromise;

   *  Multilateral governance; and

   *  Support for policy versioning and updates.

   Ideally, the trust architecture allows parties that mutually trust
   each other to form their own trust "union" or "domain", and to freely
   decide whether to trust other trust unions (domains) outside their
   own trust bubble.

   To fulfill the above requirements, which in fact apply well to inter-
   domain networking, SCION introduces the concept of *Isolation
   Domains*. An Isolation Domain (ISD) is a building block for achieving
   high availability, scalability, and support for heterogeneous trust.
   It consists of a logical grouping of ASes that share a uniform trust
   environment (i.e., a common jurisdiction).  An ISD is administered by
   multiple ASes that form the ISD core; these are the *core ASes*. It
   is governed by a policy called the *Trust Root Configuration* (TRC),
   which is negotiated by the ISD core.  The TRC defines the locally
   scoped roots of trust used to validate bindings between names and
   public keys.

   Authentication in SCION is based on digital certificates that bind
   identifiers to public keys and carry digital signatures that are
   verified by roots of trust.  SCION allows each ISD to define its own
   set of trust roots, along with the policy governing their use.  Such
   scoping of trust roots within an ISD improves security, as compromise
   of a private key associated with a trust root cannot be used to forge
   a certificate outside the ISD.  An ISD's trust roots and policy are
   encoded in the TRC, which has a version number, a list of public keys
   that serves as root of trust for various purposes, and policies
   governing the number of signatures required for performing different
   types of actions.  The TRC serves as a way to bootstrap all
   authentication within SCION.  Additionally, TRC versioning is used to
   efficiently revoke compromised roots of trust.

   The TRC also provides _trust agility_, that is, it enables users to
   select the trust roots used to initiate certificate validation.  This
   implies that users are free to choose an ISD they believe maintains a
   non-compromised set of trust roots.  ISD members can also decide
   whether to trust other ISDs and thus transparently define trust
   relationships between parts of the network.  SCION trust model,
   therefore, differs from the one provided by other PKI architectures.

1.2.  Trust Relations within an Isolation Domain

   As already mentioned previously, the control-plane PKI, SCION's
   concept of trust, is organized on ISD-level.  Each ISD can
   independently specify its own Trust Root Configuration (TRC) and
   build its own verification chain.  Each TRC consists of a collection
   of signed root certificates, which are used to sign CA certificates,
   which are in turn used to sign AS certificates.  The TRC also
   includes ISD-policies that specify, for example, the TRC's usage,
   validity, and future updates.  A TRC is a fundamental component of an
   ISD's control-plane PKI.  The so-called *base TRC* constitutes the
   ISD's trust anchor.  It is signed during a signing ceremony and then
   distributed throughout the ISD.

1.2.1.  Updates and Trust Resets

   There are two types of TRC updates: regular and sensitive.  A
   *regular TRC update* is a periodic re-issuance of the TRC where the
   entities and policies listed in the TRC remain unchanged, whereas a
   *sensitive TRC update* is an update that modifies critical aspects of
   the TRC, such as the set of core ASes.  In both cases, the base TRC
   remains unchanged.  If the ISD's TRC has been compromised, it is
   necessary for an ISD to re-establish the trust root.  This is
   possible with a process called *trust reset* (if allowed by the ISD's
   trust policy).  In this case, a new base TRC is created.

1.3.  Overview of Certificates, Keys, and Roles

   The base TRC constitutes the root of trust within an ISD.  The next
   figure provides a first impression of the trust chain within an ISD,
   based on its TRC.  For detailed descriptions, please refer to the
   chapters *reference: cert-specs* and *reference: trc-specification*.

   *Figure 2* - _Chain of trust within an ISD_

   All certificates used in SCION's control-plane PKI are in X.509 v3
   format [RFC5280].  Additionally, the TRC contains self-signed
   certificates instead of plain public keys.  Self-signed certificates
   have the following advantages over plain public keys: (1) They make
   the binding between name and public key explicit; and (2) the binding
   is signed to prove possession of the corresponding private key.

   All ASes in SCION have the task to sign and verify control-plane
   messages.  However, certain ASes have additional roles:

   *  *Core ASes*: Core ASes are a distinct set of ASes in the SCION
      control plane.  For each ISD, the core ASes are listed in the TRC.
      Each core AS in an ISD has links to other core ASes (in the same
      or in different ISDs).

   *  *Certification authorities (CAs)*: CAs are responsible for issuing
      AS certificates to other ASes and/or themselves.

   *  *Voting ASes*: Only certain ASes within an ISD may sign TRC
      updates.  The process of appending a signature to a new TRC is
      called "casting a vote"; the designated ASes that hold the private
      keys to sign a TRC update are "voting ASes".

   All further details of the SCION control-plane PKI are specified in
   the following sections.

1.4.  Trust Concept as a Function

   The SCION control-plane PKI can be seen as a function that transforms
   potential distrust among different parties into a mutually accepted
   trust contract including a trust update and reset policy as well as
   certificates used for authentication procedures in SCION's control
   plane.

   For the function to work, it is not necessary that the ASes of the
   ISD all trust each other.  However, all ASes MUST trust the ISD's
   core ASes, authoritative ASes, voting ASes, as well as its CA(s).
   These trusted parties negotiate the ISD trust contract in a
   "bootstrapping of trust" ceremony, where cryptographic material is
   exchanged, and the ISD's trust anchor, the initial Trust Root
   Configuration, is created and signed.

1.4.1.  Input

   Prior to the ceremony, the trusted parties must decide about the
   validity period of the TRC as well as the number of votes required to
   update a TRC.  They must also bring the required keys and
   certificates, the so-called root and voting keys/certificates.
   During the ceremony, the trusted parties decide about the number of
   the ISD, which must be an integer in the inclusive range between 1
   and 65535.

1.4.2.  Output

   The output of the bootstrapping of trust ceremony, or the trust
   "function", are the ISD's initial Trust Root Configuration as well as
   mutually trusted and accepted CA and AS certificates--the latter are
   used to verify SCION's control-plane messages.  Together with the
   ISD's control-plane root certificates, the CA and AS certificates
   build the ISD's trust and verification chain.

1.5.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

4.2.  Informative References

   [BARRERA17]
              Barrera, D., Chuat, L., Perrig, A., Reischuk, R., and P.
              Szalachowski, "The SCION internet architecture",
              Communications of the ACM vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 56-65,
              DOI 10.1145/3085591, May 2017,
              <https://doi.org/10.1145/3085591>.

   [CHUAT22]  Chuat, L., Legner, M., Basin, D., Hausheer, D., Hitz, S.,
              Mueller, P., and A. Perrig, "The Complete Guide to SCION",
              ISBN 978-3-031-05287-3, 2022,
              <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05288-0>.

   [I-D.scion-components]
              Rustignoli, N. and C. de Kater, "SCION Components
              Analysis", 2022, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              rustignoli-panrg-scion-components/>.

   [I-D.scion-overview]
              de Kater, C., Rustignoli, N., and A. Perrig, "SCION
              Overview", 2022, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              dekater-panrg-scion-overview/>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Corine de Kater
   ETH Zuerich
   Email: corine.dekatermuehlhaeuser@inf.ethz.ch


   Nicola Rustignoli
   ETH Zuerich
   Email: nicola.rustignoli@inf.ethz.ch
